In the past three months, Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Biden saw their fund-raising dip from the previous quarter, but Ms. Warren’s continued to grow. Her $24.6 million total surpassed the $19.2 million she raised in the second quarter, which dwarfed the $6 million she collected in the first three months of the year.

Presidential candidates must report their fund-raising for the third quarter, which covered July through September, to the Federal Election Commission by Oct. 15.

Beating Mr. Sanders’s total for the past three months would have given another jolt of momentum to Ms. Warren’s campaign. Instead, Mr. Sanders’s status as the top fund-raiser for the quarter provides a reminder of his sizable following, even as other indicators like polling are less favorable.

In the long run, Mr. Sanders’s slight financial edge over Ms. Warren in the quarter is unlikely to make a major difference in the perceptions of their candidacies. Mr. Sanders entered the race having already established an enormous network of donors during his 2016 presidential campaign, and he raised slightly less in the third quarter of 2019 than he did during the same time period in 2015.

Ms. Warren’s fund-raising in the quarter was a fraction of what President Trump and the Republican National Committee brought in, though those numbers are not directly comparable. Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign and the R.N.C. raised a combined $125 million in the past three months, officials said this week.

Ms. Warren struggled with fund-raising at the beginning of her presidential campaign, but those struggles ended up being short-lived. Her third-quarter haul is another validation of her strategy to rely on online donors to finance her campaign.

That choice is central to her bid for the presidency, freeing up her schedule and creating a tidy contrast with some of her rivals: While other candidates gather with rich donors, Ms. Warren spends hours taking pictures with voters who wait in the “selfie line” at her town hall events.