One of the world’s most notorious human traffickers attended a meeting in Sicily with Italian intelligence officials to discuss controls on migrant flows from Libya.

Abd al-Rahman Milad, known as Bija, took part in a meeting with Italian officials and a delegation from the Libyan coastguard at Cara di Mineo, in Catania, one of the biggest migrant reception centres in Europe, on 11 May 2017.

Bija’s presence was documented by the Italian newspaper Avvenire, which on Friday published an extensive investigation into the meeting.

A UN security report published in June 2017 described Bija as a bloodthirsty human trafficker responsible for shootings at sea and suspected of drowning dozens of people. He is considered to be the leader of a criminal organisation operating in the Zawyah area in north-west Libya, about 28 miles west of Tripoli.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Abd al-Rahman al-Milad. Photograph: Avvenire

In February 2017, the then Italian interior minister, Marco Minniti, signed a memorandum with the leader of Libya’s UN-recognised government, Fayez al-Sarraj, introducing a new level of cooperation between the Libyan coastguard and the Italians, including the provision of four patrol vessels.

The controversial deal has empowered the Libyan coastguard to intercept migrant dinghies at sea and bring them back to Libya, where aid agencies say the migrants and refugees suffer torture and abuse. The deal, which entailed Italy providing funds and equipment, was made by Minniti, a former communist with deep connections to Italian intelligence and the levers of the Italian state, in an attempt to stem the flow of migrants to its shores.

The agreement was recently reinforced by Italy’s interior minister, Luciana Lamorgese, at a meeting in Malta with his counterparts from France, Germany and Malta.

According to Avvenire, which obtained the photos from a source present at the meeting, Bija obtained a pass to enter Italy and take part in the meeting, which was also attended by north African delegates from a handful of international humanitarian agencies. Bija was presented at the meeting as “a commander of the Libyan coastguard”.

Bija had already been recognised by a number of migrants in Cara di Mineo on the day of the meeting.

According to the Italian newspaper’s source, Bija that day asked the Italian authorities for funds to manage the reception of migrants in Libya.

“There had always been suspicions about the agreement between the Libyan coastguard and the Italian government,” Nello Scavo, who wrote the Avvenire story, told the Guardian. “In the past, there had already been talk of the suspected involvement of traffickers in the Libyan coastguard. But now we have the evidence. It seems really strange that Italian intelligence was not aware of Bija’s identity. It is difficult to believe they were distracted.”

Last September, detectives in Sicily arrested three men who allegedly raped and tortured dozens of migrants in a detention centre in the north-west of Libya.

Prosecutors in Agrigento have collected testimonies from numerous asylum seekers from north Africa, who allegedly recognised their former captors at a migrant registration centre in Messina, Sicily.

The three alleged captors, a 27-year-old Guinean man and two Egyptians, 24 and 26, are accused of torture, kidnapping and human trafficking, operated in Zawiya detention centre, the same centre where Bija operated.

In some of the migrants’ testimonies, contained in the survey documents seen by the Guardian, asylum seekers talk about a man who called himself “Abdou Rahman, who was in charge of transferring migrants to the beach. It was he who, in the end, decided who could embark or not. He was a violent man and armed. We all feared him.”

Friday’s development came as the Italian foreign minister, Luigi Di Maio, presented a new decree regarding asylum seekers, which he said would cut the time it took for a decision on whether a migrant should be repatriated to four months.

